all right I'm here with David Deutsch
David thanks for joining me
thanks for having me
sure
so we live in a world of classical
programmable computers that have been
very successful in solving all sorts of
problems in our civilization and
researchers are also making strides in
Quantum Computing so given our
civilization success in employing
Concepts like information and
computation why was a Constructor theory
of information necessary in the first
place
it arose out of several motivations uh
initially just from constructive theory
itself because we needed to
formulate rigorous concepts of things
like measurement and possibility that
didn't rely on existing on particular
physical theories like quantum theory so
we needed to know what it means in
principle for say a Theory of physics
to support
information because if you if you think
of laws of physics any old logically
possible laws of physics there wouldn't
be information in the in the worlds that
they describe so what does it take to to
make information now in if you are
confined to Quantum Theory you'd say
well um uh an observable can store
information if it can
um if it has an observable
with at least two
uh distinct states which are measurable
and something like that would do in
quantum theory
but then a quantum theory is a hermitian
operator and it has orthogonal States
and all those things are rooted in just
quantum theory and we want to think that
will apply to all theories including
ones that haven't been invented yet all
reasonable theories in fact this will be
usable as a Criterion for whether a a
proposed theory is reasonable
foreign
so what is it about information that
makes the prevailing conception of
physics namely expressing laws of
physics in terms of initial conditions
and dynamical laws of motion so
difficult to capture whereas Constructor
Theory which is all about possible and
impossible Transformations or tasks
seems much more up to the task as it
were of explaining and capturing the
regularities and of information yes
that's exactly why it's it's because
um Constructor Theory
um it has
a counterfactual
properties at its heart so a possible
and impossible are both counterfactual
Concepts and information is inherently
counterfactual for example
um if if I I say that um
uh well
let's suppose somebody measures a
constant of nature
like pie or something
now you can't use pi to send or store
information because Pi only ever has one
value
um whereas
um whether as for example whether a spin
of an electron is pointing up or down
if um can be used to store information
and if you have more than one Spin and
they can interact in certain ways then
they can be used not only to store
information but to process information
and so uh we we using quantum theory we
can establish sorry using Constructor
Theory we can establish the minimum
criteria for a physical system to be
able to store information and to be able
to process information which is what
makes
um computation classical and Quantum
possible and then then you can say
Here's the the here's our defined class
of
conceivable laws of physics which allow
information to exist and information
processing which means among other
things it allows
measurement and computation and
therefore growth of knowledge
and the rest uh would not allow that and
we we won't be looking there for
potential laws of physics because those
laws wouldn't allow physics to happen
so following that argument would you say
that's uh the similar a similar argument
could be made for
um why it was important to establish
Concepts like measurement and
distinguishing between outcomes of an
experiment which you've touched on in
constructive theoretic terms because it
makes it then easier to look for future
object level laws of physics that must
conform to the constructive theoretic
definitions of these Concepts
yes uh of course it is possible that
construct a theory as we conceive of it
isn't true and and that somebody invents
a
um a Theory of physics
which violates the principles of
constructive theory so there is no such
thing in under that theory as for
example information or measurement or
computation but that nevertheless the
theory is testable in some sense that
transcends our present Concepts but even
then that would be useful because if you
had such a theory on the horizon
and it looked as though for example it
wasn't going to allow measurement
therefore it wasn't going to allow
science as we know it to exist then that
would be an early indication either that
the proposed Theory isn't true or if it
is true that it requires a conceptual
Revolution larger than one would at
first thought think because such a
theory might arise by just changing a
few innocent looking parameters in
quantum theory and you might then get a
theory that didn't support
science and you'd then you'd have more
than just
technical difficulties in physics you'd
have
um profound philosophical difficulties
in setting up that theory as well and
you'd constructive theory would have
been an early indication of that but I
don't think that's going to happen I
think that future theories are going to
conform to construct a theory but that's
just what I think
yeah I I guess time will tell
so let's talk about uh classical
information in particular
which is the world of bits as most
people are familiar with them what is
classical information in Constructor
Theory and by expressing classical
information in constructive theoretic
language what problem or problems have
you solved
um
so the the
um definition of classical information
under constructive theory is that uh
that a system is is an information
medium
if it can be in at least two uh
different states which uh can be
um with these States can be permuted by
possible operations that is the
operations of arbitrarily permuting
those
those States
is physically possible
so uh then you can you can uh if that
that
defines an information medium then you
can Define information as being present
in a system if it is in is in one of
those information States and could have
been in the other or in one of the
others so there's there's your
counterfactual definition of information
and
um
we we haven't had a now apart from
the fact that this
works the only concrete result that we
can display at the moment is the fact
that this is also enough to Define
quantum information and Quantum
information that is it's not the same
definition but you uh given that
framework you can Define quantum
information
in a very simple way that you can say
that an object can hold Quantum
information if
it can if it has some states that can
hold information and if it has another
state set of states that can also hold
information and if the union of those
two sets of States cannot hold
information
and uh that when you have a system like
that it it uh we call it in constructive
theory we call it super information but
the only practical Theory at the moment
that has super information is quantum
theory so this our result is that
um uh Quantum information and all its
important properties just follow from
this small difference
in the in the way that information
appears in the theory in In classical
physics it appears in the way that every
classical
um information medium
um has only one maximal set of sites
that can hold information we can have
another one but they won't be uh it
won't be compatible and then quantum
uh theory has two compatible
sets of states
where the union of the two is not a set
of information states that is because by
the way because they can't be
um distinguished by any physical process
they can't be reliably distinguished by
any physical process so that's our our
main result in regard to information to
date but uh as I think some
um uh told you the
um
what we're hoping for is that this
notion of information and therefore of
measurement
and computation
can tell us
um
what information can tell us a
measurement theory in
um new proposed laws of physics such as
Cubit field Theory where
um the the existing concepts are not
enough
um we have we have in cubic field Theory
we have separated systems where the
observables Do Not commute with each
other and yet causality is maintained
and that's conceptually very difficult
and so you have to build a new theory of
measurements we're not in Kansas anymore
as we keep saying and uh
to build a proper theory of measurement
in in quantum theory took like
depending on how you count it 30 40
Years of head scratching and thinking
that this is this can't be right this
this is this is impossible
um we think that
Constructor Theory provides a very
powerful tool for setting up a theory of
measurement within a newly proposed
Theory of physics even if it's very
um conceptually strange
it kind of reminds me of the fact that
you can
ignore fundamental principles in a given
domain so long as you're far away from
the limiting case but by which I mean
it's easy to work in Newtonian physics
if you're not approaching the speed of
light and
it strikes me that measurement kind of
feels similar where you can rely on sort
of your intuitions of how measurement
ought to work but as you said once you
start leaving Kansas as it were you
really have to understand in physical
terms what constitutes a measurement
does that seem reasonable to you that's
exactly right and and what you just said
about measurements applies to
information I mean it's really the same
problem measurement and information are
the same problem and and
um
even in relativity Einstein had this
problem of defining what measurement is
essentially
um and and the concept of measurement
had to be different because there's no
such thing as simultaneity and and so on
that problem
uh was important and he solved it but it
was minor compared with as the analogous
problem that arose in quantum theory
um and and I think that future theories
are are going to challenge our intuition
more than previous ones I mean this has
been the experience that that new
fundamental theories in physics
challenge uh our intuitions in in uh
unpredictable ways and uh with construct
a theory we hope to have a tool that
helps us to to
um formulate our intuitions properly
given the new Theory whatever it is
so is it fair to say that with your and
Kiara's work on constructive theory of
information you've effectively unified
classical and Quantum information and
it's only that they differ in one
property
yes uh I I think that that is what this
work has done and I I would hold that
out as I just said that as as being our
our one concrete result of the the
constructive theory of information so
far
um maybe uh Kiara's results in in
um constructive theory of thermodynamics
also count as because she uses the
construct theory of information there as
well
so maybe maybe her results in in
thermodynamics count as well
um but the real fun is going to begin
when we
um
when when we apply Constructor Theory to
physical theories that uh go beyond
quantum theory that are incompatible
with quantum theory
and that that's what we mean by not
being in Kansas anymore and and I think
that is when constructive theory will
come into its own my guess is
that it will not be it just won't be
practically possible
to make progress
without an overarching framework like
Constructor Theory now as I said
constructive theory could be wrong but
in that case it trying to develop it
will show us
what what is needed instead I I don't
think we can make progress without such
a framework
right right and you know every even if
constructive theory is wrong as you say
every error will kind of show us maybe
why it's wrong and we can progress in
other ways either way it seems like it's
kind of a revolutionary
conceptual Revolution as I think you
mentioned earlier I think so uh yes I
think that's very much the case
so much of constructive theory is about
and is expressed in principles which are
laws that constrain other laws and
you've conjectured in your paper with
Chiara several principles that explain
or capture the regularities of
information so let's just go through a
couple examples
so first of all there's the
interoperability principle so what
regularity of information does that
capture
so we take for granted that if we have
um information in one physical medium
let's say a book
even if it's an ancient book uh that
that was produced by a culture that we
don't know about
um we we don't yet know what the symbols
mean or what their language was and so
on we are we take for granted nowadays
that the information content of this
book
and therefore the knowledge content as
well
can be
um Faithfully copied into a different
medium for example
um uh magnetic domains in a in a in a
microchip or into sound waves when when
somebody reads it to somebody else or
indeed into into our retinas and brains
as well and and so on so all these are
examples of
information transcending
the substrate in which it's instantiated
so information is is this weird hybrid
of a thing that information can only
exist in physical form
and yet it is independent of the of the
specific physical form in which it is
ever instantiated
so but but this what I've just described
now although it's extremely familiar and
taken for granted is not logically
necessary at all it is conceivable that
physics could be different and not
satisfy this principle so that you could
have
um
some physical objects that that have
information and have science possible
and and you know observables and uh
measurements and
um
and even civilization and so on and that
it simply wasn't translatable
into another physical system which could
also have science and and and and and so
the whole the whole edifice of knowledge
and yet they weren't inter-translatable
so uh in in theory this so uh aliens
from another planet uh it could could be
based on different physics not just
different physical objects but different
aspects of physical laws could come and
visit us and could be fundamentally
unable to communicate with us
um
uh this is logically possible but the
principle of constructive theory says
that it is not so
and all
known physical theories
um have the property that wherever they
instantiate information it is indeed
interoperable with with other
information so it can be it can be
information in electron spins can be
translated into information in microwave
cavities which can be written down and
published as incon paper and you know
the whole works and it it all
um with arbitrarily reliable
uh copying
so
um seems to be a feature of our universe
it is as far as most people can conceive
as far as I can conceive it it is a
necessary feature for knowledge and for
science as we know it to exist at all
and
although it is a feature of all known
physical theories there's no known
physical law or there had been before
constructive theory there is no known
physical law that implies it
it it happens to be a feature that laws
as far as we know obey
but unlike say the law of conservation
of energy that there's no no one has
uh expressed this regularity as a law
until constructive theory came along and
so that's the principle of
interoperability
of information
and you had mentioned the scientific
method in your answer so I just want to
talk about one more principle and uh
first of all it does seem like from your
work in the constructive theory of
information that you're actually
integrating parts of the scientific
method itself into fundamental physics I
mean tell me if I'm wrong but that's
certainly what it seems like so uh yes
uh I would rather say that we're
expressing parts of the the scientific
methodology in constructive theory
um
it
[Music]
um
uh specific principles like
interoperability could be modified
um
uh
without without making the rest of
constructive theory full
uh it's just that it could only be
modified in a way that was compatible
with the rest of the theory and and if
the theory has to be
um modified too much then it's a matter
of degree whether you call it the same
Theory you know it it might be some
conceptually different framework from
constructive theory
um so uh the
the
interoperability of information is is
related to the comprehensibility of the
universe in this way
if the universe isn't wholly
comprehensible
which by the way on the philosophically
I think that's ridiculous but as a
physicist I have to allow it as a
possible uh property that that theory
might have
um then uh some in in some ways
constructive theory could be uh altered
to
um reflect that
but as I said earlier at least it would
give us an early warning that something
profound is is happening when we when we
postulate that something which has
profound implications for physics
for the laws of physics as we know them
some some the laws of physics have to be
formulated not just differently but but
uh it with with different modes of
explanation not not just with different
explanations which have yet to be
discovered
um constructive theory would give us an
early warning of that and uh you know if
if these if these new theories had that
property and made sense then they might
be accommodatable in a modified version
of constructive theory but we're being
very speculative now I I don't think any
of that is going to happen I think
constructive theory will be a reliable
guide to what not to what the next
theory is but to what the next Theory
can't be
or what the next Theory can't be without
a revolution bigger than it looks at
first sight
right right so part of the one of the
features of Constructor theory is that
because it's kind of in a way a theory
about theories
it
forbids certain kinds of theories from
being possible whereas in the prevailing
conception the theory is forbid just
what physical phenomena are possible
so it's kind of a level it's a higher
level theory in that sense yes well the
prevailing conception theories forbid
what is possible under that particular
Theory
so the theories don't speak about each
other so so they don't say they don't
say uh say
um the laws of Dynamics don't say that a
perpetual motion machine is impossible
they say a perpetual motion machine
isn't is impossible under lagrangian
Dynamics let's say
but but somebody couldn't but there
physicists have conjectured for for over
a hundred years that
um
that there is a principle of physics the
principle of conservation of energy
that is a principle about other theories
including ones we don't know yet and so
we use the principle of conservation of
energy as a guide to conjecturing new
theories because we know that if a new
Theory
uh violates the principle of
conservation of energy then something
either is false or something we have to
reconceptualize the world under that
theory it's not just a change of the
type of changing a parameter or adding a
new term in an equation
right right and it speaks to the fact
that um
merely falsifying theories is not quite
as straightforward as sometimes it's
made out to be there's a you know
there's always background knowledge and
so forth that's right yes uh and the
with conservation of energy this has in
fact happened uh
that for a start with with neutrinos
that's our favorite example uh neutrinos
we discovered because uh people noticed
that energy apparently wasn't being
conserved and therefore uh some new
process must be involved and this turned
out to be weak interactions weak nuclear
interactions but another example is uh
relativity itself where
um the notion of the the the principle
of the conservation of energy
well principle of conservation and
energy can be expressed in a number of
different forms which in Pre
relativistic physics were all equivalent
to each other
but with relativity it turned out that
some of those
um some of those formulations
were
um
incompatible with relativity
and uh fortunately there are conceptions
of the law of conservation of energy
which are compatible with general theory
of relativity now it could be that some
modification of Relativity like
if there was a good theory of
uh dark energy for for example which
violated the principle of conservation
of energy some people have proposed
then the principle of conservation of
energy
um
would have been refuted
but this very fact
guides our theorizing about dark energy
because
having a theory of dark energy that
makes it incompatible with any kind of
principle of conservation of energy
would be a big revolution much bigger
than it looks if you just look at the an
additional term in Einstein's equations
so let's talk about one more principle
um so that listeners can get a taste of
what the Constructor what principles
look like in constructive theory really
but more specifically in constructive
theory of information the principle of
consistency of measurement you expressed
in your paper with Kiara I wonder if you
could elaborate on that principle and
talk about what regularities you're
capturing there that we all sort of take
for granted already
yes so this is this is one of the
principles that that we use to make
sense of information in the context of
measurement
which is the main context we originally
wanted it in
um uh now we we assume that that
um this consistency of measurement has
to do with information in the sense that
when you measure something of say a
physical quantity like like the speed of
your car
um what you're doing is you're causing
an information variable to go into a
state that represents that the physical
property of of in this case the car so
that your speedometer for example that
is showing that the needle is at a
certain place that's an information
observable with a certain uh sorry an an
information
um medium in a certain state
and that uh according to the theory by
which it was designed that represents a
physical property of the car
now uh the thing is you can also measure
the
um that physical property of the car by
a physically very different process for
example the policeman might be measuring
your speed with a radar gun
and
um the principle of consistency of
measurement says that
the speed on your speedometer and the
speed indicated on the radar gun if both
of those are working properly
will be the same
and uh that's really if that weren't
true then there wouldn't really be such
a thing as measurement in the way we
normally conceptualize it and again
conversely if it wasn't true
the situation might be rescuable by a
new conception of measurement but that
would be a big thing
um it would be a a a change in our
philosophical framework of what science
is and so on that is much bigger than
just than could be expressed by just
saying that that
um uh needles on speedometers and and uh
indicators on the display of a radar
speed measuring device aren't
necessarily equal
that that sounds like a very tame tame
thing to say and it is a tame thing to
say in terms of the object level
theories involved
but in in terms of the principle
involved it's a huge
um it would be a huge change and again
we think that that's not going to happen
we think that the world
in fact obeys the principle of
consistency of measurement
so with these principles that you've
conjectured again with Kiara and the
the results that you have from your
initial Constructor theory of
information paper do you expect
Constructor Theory to solve further
problems down the road Within
um information Theory itself whether
classical or Quantum and I say that to
contrast with what we've been talking
about which is that you expect to
construct a theory of information to
help physicists or scientists discover
future theories
uh yes
um
the
again Chiara has been working on this um
the constructive theory of information
does help with existing theories in in
situations where
um
although there is no new physics
involved we don't know what physics is
involved so for example in in a
situation where systems are interacting
two systems are interacting via another
system that is not understood
or which is too complicated to analyze
explicitly
then constructed because of the
principles of constructive theory
applying we can say something about that
interaction we can make predictions
about that interaction that are
independent of the intervening process
um provided that the intervening process
obeys Constructor Theory
you can do the same thing with with
energy you know you you can you can say
that um that regardless of the fuel that
the rocket uses
um uh if if you have this amount of fuel
you cannot reach if you have this amount
of energy
uh in the fuel you cannot reach more
than a certain height
so you can say that
not knowing what form of energy is being
used by the rocket and similarly when
you have information
uh being exchanged between systems like
like
um
gravitational field and electromagnetic
field and the states of an electron and
so on under quantum theory and that the
whole thing is is uh
only parts of the system are understood
exactly
and the rest are the the the
medium that is
um
uh transferring the the force or
whatever it is from one well understood
system to another Well understood system
isn't well understood you can still make
predictions using constructive theory
that the the
um
Kiara and vladco have
um several ideas where they have
elaborated this into a useful form that
may even be
um usable in real experiments at some
point
so since the Constructor theory of
information principles are expected to
be Universal you had mentioned I think
uh Dark Matter earlier or maybe Dark
Energy but shouldn't those whatever they
are would we expect them to also conform
to the constructive theoretic principles
of information and the rest of
Constructor theories principles yes I I
mean in my opinion
um it's not on the cards that they won't
obey it of course I could be wrong and
as I said if I am wrong that there would
still be useful things to be found from
constructive theory but uh yes uh it
um
I think there is no sign
in in any of the problems arising from
either dark matter or dark energy there
is no sign that uh construct theoretic
principles are being violated
all right David well this has been very
interesting and very informative and I
really appreciate your time
well thank you very much uh
it was enjoyable answering these
questions and I I always learn something
yeah you well you and me both
have a good rest of your day same to you